HOLO // NEXUS — standalone
==========================

Runs on any PC with a modern browser. Wallpaper Engine is NOT required.


HOW TO RUN
----------
Double-click index.html. That's it.

Both files must stay in the same folder — index.html loads holo-models.js
from next to itself. If you move one, move both.


SETTINGS
--------
Click the gear icon at the top of the screen. Everything is in there:
subject, colours, backdrop, ring style, fonts, layout, projector, and so on.
Drag the panel by its top bar to move it out of the way.

Settings are saved in the browser's local storage, so they persist between
visits as long as you open it from the same path in the same browser.


AUDIO
-----
Click "ENABLE AUDIO" (top of screen) and allow microphone access. The HUD
then reacts to whatever the microphone hears — the mouth opens, the spectrum
ring moves, and the meters read live.

Why the microphone: a web page cannot read your PC's audio output the way
Wallpaper Engine can. Inside Wallpaper Engine the wallpaper gets the system
audio stream directly and this button never appears. In a plain browser the
microphone is the only audio a page is allowed to have. If you want it to
react to music, play the music out loud, or use the Wallpaper Engine version.

With no audio at all it stays deliberately still: meters read zero and the
panel says NO AUDIO LINK rather than inventing movement.


AMBIENT SOUND
-------------
Settings panel -> Audio -> "Ambient sound bed", with a volume slider.
Off by default.

It is synthesised in the page (a few detuned low oscillators), not a sound
file, so there is nothing extra to download and no loop to notice.

One thing worth knowing: the bed plays out of the same speakers the
visualiser listens to, so it would otherwise hear its own hum and sit
permanently "LIVE". The activity threshold lifts in step with the ambient
volume to stop that. Real audio still registers normally.


VOICE ASSISTANT
---------------
Settings panel -> Audio -> "Voice assistant". Off by default, because it
opens the microphone and talks back.

Say the wake word, then a question:  "Nexus, what time is it"

It answers from what the HUD already measures: time, date, processor load,
memory, battery, network, uptime, frame rate, and the current subject. It
also takes commands - "Nexus, switch to skull", "Nexus, paper background",
"Nexus, start spinning", "Nexus, be quiet".

The wake word, the speaking voice and the volume are all in the Voice block
of the settings panel. "TEST VOICE" checks speech output on its own, without
needing the microphone.

Whether it can HEAR you depends on the browser. Speech recognition needs a
speech service that plain Chromium builds have and some embedded ones do not,
so the status line in the Voice block reports what actually happened:

  READY / LISTENING  - working
  NO API             - this browser has no speech recognition at all
  DENIED             - microphone permission refused
  NO SERVICE         - the browser has the API but no speech backend
  ERROR (code)       - something else; the code is shown

The same status appears in the bottom ticker as VOICE, so it can be read
inside Wallpaper Engine where there is no console.

Speaking back uses the operating system's voices and does not need any of
that, so "TEST VOICE" can work even when listening does not.


LOCAL AI CONVERSATION
----------------------
The fixed command list only covers exact phrases. Anything open-ended -
opinions, explanations, follow-up questions - is handed to a local model
running in Ollama (http://127.0.0.1:11434), if it is installed and running.
Settings -> Voice -> "LOCAL AI FALLBACK", with a model name field underneath
(default llama3.2:3b - pull it with "ollama pull llama3.2:3b" if you do not
have it).

The last few exchanges are remembered, so a follow-up like "what did I just
ask you" actually refers back correctly - it is a conversation, not a string
of one-off answers.

Nothing leaves the machine: Ollama runs locally, and the bridge (not the
wallpaper page) talks to it directly, since Ollama sends no CORS headers and
a browser fetch to it would just be blocked.

Replies are kept to a sentence or two on purpose, since they are read aloud.

You do not need to talk to use this - the conversation box has a text field
for typing instead.

A cold model can take real time to answer the first time (tens of seconds on
a loaded machine); Ollama keeps it warm for a while after, and follow-ups are
fast.


VOICE INSIDE WALLPAPER ENGINE (the bridge)
------------------------------------------
Inside Wallpaper Engine the microphone opens but transcription does not work:
Chromium sends audio to a speech service, and the embedded browser Wallpaper
Engine uses ships without the keys to reach it. It fails with "error network"
no matter what you set.

The bridge works around that. Recognition happens in a small companion
process, and the recognised text is sent to the wallpaper over a local
socket. Everything after that - wake word, answers, replies, the mouth - is
the same code path as normal.

Start the bridge once - double-click start-bridge.bat, or add it to Windows
startup with install-startup.bat so it is always there.

Everything else is a button in the wallpaper:

  Settings -> Voice -> START LISTENING

That button turns the microphone on and off. The wallpaper cannot launch a
program itself, so it asks the bridge to do it - which is why the bridge is
the one piece that has to be running. If it is not, the button says
BRIDGE OFFLINE instead of pretending to work.

The bottom ticker shows BRIDGE LINKED, and BRIDGE LINKED/MIC while listening.

Speech model is picked right above that button:

  Tiny    fastest, least accurate      (~1s per phrase)
  Small   balanced, the default        (~2s)
  Medium  most accurate, needs ~1.5GB  (~6s)

Changing it restarts the listener on the new model.


SPEECH TO TEXT (holo-listen.py)
-------------------------------
Listens to the microphone, waits until you stop talking, transcribes locally
with faster-whisper, and posts the text to the bridge. No network, no API
key, nothing leaves the machine.

  python holo-listen.py                    listen on the default microphone
  python holo-listen.py --list-devices     show available microphones
  python holo-listen.py --device "..."     pick one
  python holo-listen.py --model tiny       faster, less accurate
  python holo-listen.py --gpu              try the GPU, falls back to CPU
  python holo-listen.py --file clip.wav    transcribe a file instead of a mic
  python holo-listen.py --dry-run          print, do not send

It measures the room's noise level for about a second at startup, so stay
quiet while it says "calibrating". The gate then floats above that floor -
a fixed threshold only ever works on the machine it was tuned on.

Audio is captured through ffmpeg rather than a Python audio library, because
ffmpeg is already installed and this avoids adding a binary dependency just
to open a microphone.

Requires: ffmpeg, and python with faster-whisper. Both were already present
on the machine this was built on. If faster-whisper is missing:

  pip install faster-whisper

Anything you type into that terminal is sent to the wallpaper as if spoken:

  nexus what time is it

Other programs can push text in too:

  curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8787/say -d "nexus switch to skull"

That POST hook is where speech-to-text plugs in - anything that can turn
audio into text and make an HTTP request can drive it, Whisper included.
Nothing is wired to a microphone yet; this is the pipe, proven end to end.

It listens on 127.0.0.1 only, so nothing off your machine can reach it.
Whatever can talk to it can drive the wallpaper, so leave it that way.


BACKGROUND PICTURE
------------------
Settings -> Backdrop -> Picture, then "CHOOSE IMAGE".

The image is downscaled and re-encoded before being saved, so a large photo
will not overflow the browser storage quota. It is kept separately from the
rest of your settings — if it ever fails to save, you are told, and only the
picture is affected.

Fill / Fit / Tile control how it is placed. "Picture dim" and "Picture blur"
exist because a HUD has to stay readable over an arbitrary photo, and very
few photos are quiet enough on their own. Start around 45% dim.


PAPER LEGIBILITY
----------------
If the paper theme looks too faint, raise Optics -> "Paper contrast".

Every brightness value in this wallpaper was chosen for glowing light on a
black screen. The same value drawn as dark ink on a cream sheet is far weaker
than it looks on black, so paper scales them all up by this one control.
Default 190%.


FULL SCREEN
-----------
Press F11 in most browsers. For a permanently-on display, use your browser's
kiosk mode, e.g.:

  chrome.exe --kiosk --app="file:///C:/path/to/holo-nexus/index.html"


NOW PLAYING PANEL
-----------------
Shows "NO HOST BRIDGE" outside Wallpaper Engine. Track titles come from
Windows' media controls via a Wallpaper Engine bridge, which a plain browser
has no access to. Everything else works the same.


PERFORMANCE
-----------
It idles cheaply on purpose: when nothing is happening the frame rate drops
and the point cloud is served from cache. Turning off "Loop subject spin" and
setting Ring spin to 0 lets it go fully still, which is the cheapest state.
Idle FPS and idle power saving are under Performance in the settings panel.
